---
layout: post
title:  "Easter 1916"
date: 2019-04-26
excerpt: "A poem by W. B. Yeats describing the poet's torn emotions regarding the events of the Easter Rising staged in Ireland against British rule on Easter Monday, April 24, 1916. The uprising was unsuccessful, and most of the Irish republican leaders involved were executed for treason."
feature: 
tag:
- English
- Notes
- Easter
comments: true
---

On Easter Sunday of 1916, Irish nationalists launched a spirited by unsuccessful revolt against the British government, which had ruled Ireland with an Iron hand for three centuries. The week of street fighting that followed is known as the Easter Rebellion. The leaders of the rebellion were captured and executed. After the First World War, fighting broke out again, and in 1922 Britain recognized Ireland's Dominion status.

<center><pre>

I have met them at close of day
Coming with vivid faces
From counter or desk among grey
Eighteenth-century houses.
I have passed with a nod of the head
Or polite meaningless words,
Or have lingered awhile and said
Polite meaningless words,
And thought before I had done
Of a mocking tale or a gibe
To please a companion
Around the fire at the club,
Being certain that they and I
But lived where motley is worn:
All changed, changed utterly:
A terrible beauty is born.

That woman's days were spent
In ignorant good-will,
Her nights in argument
Until her voice grew shrill.
What voice more sweet than hers
When, young and beautiful,
She rode to harriers?
This man had kept a school
And rode our wingèd horse;
This other his helper and friend
Was coming into his force;
He might have won fame in the end,
So sensitive his nature seemed,
So daring and sweet his thought.
This other man I had dreamed
A drunken, vainglorious lout.
He had done most bitter wrong
To some who are near my heart,
Yet I number him in the song;
He, too, has resigned his part
In the casual comedy;
He, too, has been changed in his turn,
Transformed utterly:
A terrible beauty is born.

Hearts with one purpose alone
Through summer and winter seem
Enchanted to a stone
To trouble the living stream.
The horse that comes from the road,
The rider, the birds that range
From cloud to tumbling cloud,
Minute by minute they change;
A shadow of cloud on the stream
Changes minute by minute;
A horse-hoof slides on the brim,
And a horse plashes within it;
The long-legged moor-hens dive,
And hens to moor-cocks call;
Minute by minute they live:
The stone's in the midst of all.

Too long a sacrifice
Can make a stone of the heart.
O when may it suffice?
That is Heaven's part, our part
To murmur name upon name,
As a mother names her child
When sleep at last has come
On limbs that had run wild.
What is it but nightfall?
No, no, not night but death;
Was it needless death after all?
For England may keep faith
For all that is done and said.
We know their dream; enough
To know they dreamed and are dead;
And what if excess of love
Bewildered them till they died?
I write it out in a verse—
MacDonagh and MacBride
And Connolly and Pearse
Now and in time to be,
Wherever green is worn,
Are changed, changed utterly:
A terrible beauty is born.
</pre> <center>

When Yeats wrote "Easter 1916," only three months after the leaders of the rebellion were executed, he could not have known that Ireland would win its effective independence less than six years later. He is not one of the revolutionaries at the outset, and he remains detached from them and their cause. He does not speak of what they have accomplished for Ireland. Even later in the poem, when they have won his admiration, it is not clear that Yeats approves of their aims.  
Rather, he praised the "terrible beauty" to which they have given birth. He praises them for resigning from the "casual comedy" of ordinary life, which Yeats sees as ephemeral and meaningless. If life is a stream, then they have become a stone in its midst: interfacing with it ("trouble") but otherwise transforming nothing about it except its appearance.  
The revolutionaries become a monument, an aesthetic object. What they have done remains "terrible" to him morally, while aesthetically he recognizes its "beauty."